piper blog post (#39)
uw-syfi/uw-syfi.github.io: _posts/2026-06-05-piper.md

---
layout: post
title: "Introducing Piper: User-Controlled Distributed Training for PyTorch"
date: 2026-06-05
author: "Megan Frisella, Shubham Tiwari, Andy Ruan, Yi Pan, Parker Gustafson, Mat Jacob, Gilbert Bernstein, Stephanie Wang"
excerpt: "Piper is a user-controllable distributed training system that uses model annotations and scheduling directives to express model placement, pipeline scheduling, and GPU stream scheduling."
---

**TL;DR:** New distributed training strategies and optimizations should not require new distributed runtimes.

> Large training jobs increasingly combine pipeline, data, and expert parallelism with ZeRO-style sharding, creating placement and GPU scheduling choices that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Large training jobs increasingly combine multiple parallelism strategies such as pipeline, data, and expert parallelism with ZeRO-style sharding, creating placement and GPU scheduling choices that
```

current frameworks cannot express cleanly.
Today, ML researchers and practitioners choose between building one-off specialized systems that perform well but are hard to adapt, and general-purpose frameworks that are easier to use but expose limited control.
**Piper** is a user-controllable distributed training system for PyTorch that separates model placement and GPU scheduling from model code and runtime
implementation.
With lightweight model annotations and a small scheduling language, Piper lets users express, visualize, profile, and run high-performance training schedules such as DualPipe-style pipeline- and expert-parallel overlap.

- 📄 paper: TODO arxiv link
- 💻 code: [https://github.com/uw-syfi/piper/tree/dag-ir](https://github.com/uw-syfi/piper/tree/dag-ir) TODO publish a release

---

## Composed parallelism dimensions have complex communication patterns

> Large model training commonly composes several parallelism dimensions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Large model training commonly composes several parallelism dimensions such as:
```

Reviewer: You may want to include tensor parallelism on this list anyway, just because it's so common. It's okay if Piper doesn't support it yet.

Figure 3 shows different GPU scheduling choices, where streams represent GPU parallelism.

{: style="text-align:center"}
![Communication stream tradeoffs.](/assets/img/blog/2026-06-05-piper/streams.jpg)
***Figure 3.** Stream scheduling choices for DP all-reduce and EP all-to-all in an overlapped microbatch pair.
The best choice depends on kernel running times, dispatch ordering, and critical-path dependencies.*

Putting A2A and AR on separate streams (a) lets them run concurrently but risks interference on network bandwidth.
Putting A2A and AR on the same stream (b) avoids network interference by serializing the collectives, but can delay communication.
Breaking up the AR into finer-grained units (c) can reduce interference (parameter bucketing is a common example of this strategy), but it’s still hard to predict the overall effect on training throughput, as partitioning can reduce communication efficiency.

Existing general-purpose training frameworks like [Megatron](https://github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM), [DeepSpeed](https://github.com/deepspeedai/DeepSpeed), and [TorchTitan](https://github.com/pytorch/torchtitan) don't expose low-level scheduling choices.

> For example, TorchTitan implements independent runtime support for different parallelism dimensions and eagerly dispatches communication operators for different dimensions on separate streams, in practice supporting only option (a). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, TorchTitan implements different parallelism dimensions in isolation and eagerly dispatches communication operators for different dimensions on separate streams, in practice supporting only option (a). 
```

There is something about the "independent" word that I think isn't quite right. Not sure that "in isolation" is exactly right either, can think on it some more.

Low-level performance tuning is not possible without invasive runtime changes. 

> Current frameworks lack a central abstraction for flexibly scheduling communication and computation operators across and within GPUs. 

Reviewer: The transition between this sentence and the preceding/succeeding sentences could be smoother.

Piper's key idea is to decouple model placement and scheduling choices from both the model implementation and the runtime.
Piper builds abstractions to expose control over inter-device model placement and pipeline schedules as well as intra-device scheduling. 

**Key idea**: Piper decouples model placement and scheduling choices from both the model implementation and the runtime.

## Piper at a glance

Piper has two user-facing inputs:

1. An annotated PyTorch model.
2. A program of scheduling directives.

> Piper's compiler traces the model, extracts annotated regions as schedulable model components, and applies schedule directives as graph rewrites on a distributed training IR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Piper's compiler traces the model using TorchDynamo, extracts annotated regions as schedulable model components, and applies schedule directives as graph rewrites on a distributed training intermediate representation (IR).
```

The IR is a **global training DAG** which explicitly encodes compute, communication, data dependencies, temporal dependencies, device placement, and logical stream assignment.

Piper's runtime then decomposes this global DAG into per-device execution plans and runs them on Ray workers.
Each worker manages local CUDA streams, communicators, model-state buffers, and intermediate tensors.

{: style="text-align:center"}
![Piper architecture.](/assets/img/blog/2026-06-05-piper/architecture.jpg)
***Figure 4.** Piper's architecture.
The user provides an annotated model and schedule; Piper compiles them into a global training DAG and executes per-worker sub-DAGs with a distributed runtime.*

## High-performance MoE training with a DualPipe-like schedule in Piper

We will walk through an example of distributing an MoE model with PP x DP x EP placement and a coordinating DualPipe-like training schedule in Piper.

> You can run the example yourself with the following command from the [Piper repository root](https://github.com/uw-syfi/piper/tree/dag-ir):

Reviewer: I guess it's okay here to not include the command directly here since you want to make sure the user goes through the installation first anyway.

For our intended PP x EP x DP placement, we use two tags.

```python
PP_TAG = "PP"
EP_TAG = "EP"
```

`PP` identifies pipeline stages and `EP` identifies expert MLPs inside an MoE layer.
The expert annotation appears inside the MoE module.

```python
class AnnotatedMoE(MoE):
    def forward(self, x: torch.Tensor) -> torch.Tensor:
        bs, slen, dim = x.shape
        x = x.view(-1, dim)

        (
            top_scores,
            selected_experts_indices,
            num_tokens_per_expert,
        ) = self.router(x, self.expert_bias)

        (
            top_scores_experts_sorted,
            token_indices_experts_sorted,
            num_tokens_per_expert,
        ) = self.reorderer(top_scores, selected_experts_indices)

        routed_input = x[token_indices_experts_sorted // self.router.top_k]

        if self.score_before_experts:
            routed_input = (
                routed_input.to(torch.float32)
                * top_scores_experts_sorted.reshape(-1, 1)
            ).to(x.dtype)

        with piper.annotate(EP_TAG):
            dispatched_input = routed_input.contiguous()
            routed_output = self.experts(dispatched_input, num_tokens_per_expert)

>             gathered_output = routed_output.contiguous()

Reviewer: One thing I'm a bit confused on is what happens if the annotation doesn't include the contiguous() calls. Is there a way to explain what should and shouldn't be included under the annotation when applying sharding?

The same model code can therefore be traced with different PP degrees, while Piper assigns stage indices automatically in dataflow order.
Each annotated region becomes a schedulable pipeline chunk.

These annotations are metadata attached during [`torch.fx`](https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/2.12/fx.html) tracing.
Piper leverages [TorchDynamo](https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/2.12/user_guide/torch_compiler/torch.compiler_dynamo_overview.html) to extract an annotated PyTorch operator graph as an `fx.Graph`.
Piper's compiler decomposes the graph into sub-graphs per annotated region: these are the smallest schedulable units in our system. 

In the next part of the demo, we will see how a user scheduling program instructs Piper's compiler to shard, replicate, and overlap annotated model regions to build a high-performance distributed training plan. 

### Scheduling DualPipe-like PP x DP x EP model placement

The second user input is a *schedule* made up of directives which tell the compiler how to shard, replicate, and overlap annotated model regions. 
Internally, each directive encodes a rewrite of the DAG IR that represents the distributed training schedule.

> The following directives come from the [small example schedule here](https://github.com/uw-syfi/piper/blob/dag-ir/examples/base-schedules/pp2_dp2_ep2_custom_order.json).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following directives are snippets from the [small example schedule here](https://github.com/uw-syfi/piper/blob/dag-ir/examples/base-schedules/pp2_dp2_ep2_custom_order.json).
```

In the next part of the demo, we will see how a user scheduling program instructs Piper's compiler to shard, replicate, and overlap annotated model regions to build a high-performance distributed training plan. 

### Scheduling DualPipe-like PP x DP x EP model placement

The second user input is a *schedule* made up of directives which tell the compiler how to shard, replicate, and overlap annotated model regions. 
Internally, each directive encodes a rewrite of the DAG IR that represents the distributed training schedule.

The following directives come from the [small example schedule here](https://github.com/uw-syfi/piper/blob/dag-ir/examples/base-schedules/pp2_dp2_ep2_custom_order.json).

First, we use `place` to set up the pipeline stages: with data parallelism degree 2, stage 0 runs on devices 0 and 2, and stage 1 runs on devices 1 and 3.

```json
[
  {
    "op": "place",
    "filter": {"PP": 0},
    "devices": [0, 2],
    "stream": "pp_stream"
  },
  {
    "op": "place",
    "filter": {"PP": 1},
    "devices": [1, 3],
    "stream": "pp_stream"
  }
]
```

> When the compiler sees a cross-device data dependency (e.g. from pipeline stage 0 to 1 in the forward pass and stage 1 to 0 in the backward pass), it adds point-to-point send/recv communication nodes to the DAG IR and associates them with a logical stream `pp_stream`.

Reviewer: The "logical stream" concept might require a little bit more explanation.

We will highlight a few results covering question 2, but please see the paper for the full evaluation. 

### PP x EP and DualPipeV

We evaluate support for DualPipe-like schedules in the baseline systems compared with Piper. 
TorchTitan is the only baseline which supports DualPipe-like all-to-all overlapping. 

{: style="text-align:center"}
![PP x EP throughput for 1F1B, interleaved 1F1B, and DualPipeV.](/assets/img/blog/2026-06-05-piper/throughput.jpg)
***Figure 8.** PP x EP throughput for Qwen3 1B and Qwen3 9B with various pipeline schedules.*

On Qwen3 1B, Piper-DualPipeV improves throughput by 13% over Piper-1F1B.
TorchTitan-DualPipeV improves only 3% over TorchTitan-1F1B in the same setting.
From brief exploration into the TorchTitan codebase, we attribute TorchTitan's smaller improvement to unintended serialization between dispatch threads for forward and backward microbatches.

On Qwen3 9B, TorchTitan runs out of memory in the evaluated configuration.
Piper-DualPipeV improves throughput by 10% over Piper's interleaved 1F1B schedule and 6% over Megatron's interleaved 1F1B schedule.
Megatron does not support DualPipeV; its interleaved schedule is the closest baseline.

> In addition to overlapping EP communication, we plan to further improve performance over Megatron by applying operator graph-level fusion, common to Megatron's hand-tuned transformer kernels. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to overlapping EP communication, we plan to further improve performance by integrating Megatron's optimized kernels. 
```

We illustrate this in Figure 9, which shows that Piper supports much larger batch sizes by correctly encoding ZeOR-2 and ZeRO-3 sharding semantics. 

{: style="text-align:center"}
![PP x ZeRO memory consumption.](/assets/img/blog/2026-06-05-piper/memory.jpg)
***Figure 9.** Peak memory for PP x ZeRO-2 and PP x ZeRO-3 on Qwen3 9B.*

## Closing

Piper is built around a simple premise: new distributed training strategies should not require new distributed runtimes.

By separating model placement and GPU scheduling from model code and runtime implementation, Piper gives users a concise way to express schedules that would otherwise require invasive framework changes.
We think this makes Piper useful both as a practical training system and as a research platform.

If you are designing a new pipeline schedule, exploring how to overlap communication, or trying to compose parallelism dimensions that current frameworks do not support cleanly, Piper gives you a way to express, visualize, profile, and iterate quickly.
We also hope Piper's scheduling interface can serve as a useful target for future automatic and agentic scheduling approaches.

> Please read our paper and try out the examples in our repository!

Reviewer: It's also nice to leave a standard way for people to give feedback. Email and/or a link to the github issues page (https://github.com/uw-syfi/piper/issues/new)
